Kafka Node Pools: Node ID Management (#379)
strimzi/strimzi.github.io: _posts/2023-08-19-kafka-node-pools-node-id-management.md

spec:
  # ...
```

It has no impact on any nodes and their node IDs which might already exist in the node pool.
But when a new node is created, Strimzi will find the lowest available node ID from this range and use it.
In case all node IDs from the range would be already in-use, Strimzi will use the lowest available node ID outside of this range.
If you want, you can also combine multiple ranges or use individual node IDs: `"[5, 8, 10-15, 18, 20-25]"`.

Let's imagine the same situation as we discussed in the previous section, but this time with the two node pools using their own node ID ranges:

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  name: pool-a
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
  annotations:
    strimzi.io/next-node-ids: "[0-99]"
spec:
  # ...
---

apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  name: pool-b
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
  annotations:
    strimzi.io/next-node-ids: "[100-199]"
spec:
  # ...
```

When they are first deployed, the node IDs in the first pool will be 0, 1, and 2.
And the node IDs in the second pool will be 100, 101, and 102.

> After the scale up and scale down, the first node pool will use node IDs 0, 1, 2, 3 and 4.
> And the second node pool will use node ID 100.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the scale up, the first node pool uses node IDs 0, 1, 2, 3 and 4.
After the scale down, the second node pool uses node ID 100.
```

> Since each node pool has its own range of node IDs, they do not mix and it is much easier to see which node pool does the node ID belong to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since each node pool has its own range of node IDs, they do not mix and it is much easier to see which node pool the node ID belongs to.
```

If you want, you can also use the range notation in reverse order where it starts from the higher number - `"[99-0]"`.
In that case, the operator will use the highest available number from this range first.
With that, you can do something like this:

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  name: pool-a
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
  annotations:
    strimzi.io/next-node-ids: "[0-99]"
spec:
  # ...
---

apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  name: pool-b
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
  annotations:
    strimzi.io/next-node-ids: "[99-0]"
spec:
  # ...
```

> Where both node pool share the same range.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, both node pools share the same range.
```

But one of them starts using the node IDs from 0 and other one from 99.
So the first pool will have IDs 0, 1, and 2.
And the second pool will get IDs 99, 98, and 97.

#### What is the maximum node ID?

> One important thing to keep in mind customizing the node IDs used by the different node pools is that by default, Apache Kafka let's you use only IDs from 0 to 999.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One important thing to keep in mind when customizing the node IDs used by the different node pools is that by default, Apache Kafka lets you use only IDs from 0 to 999.
```

This is controlled by the [`reserved.broker-max.id`](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#brokerconfigs_reserved.broker.max.id) option in Kafka brokers.
So, if you want to use node IDs bigger then 999, you have to change this setting in the `Kafka` custom resource:

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
  annotations:
    strimzi.io/node-pools: enabled
spec:
  kafka:
    config:
      reserved.broker.max.id: 10000
  # ...
---

apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  name: pool-a
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
  annotations:
    strimzi.io/next-node-ids: "[1000-1999]"
spec:
  # ...
---

apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  name: pool-b
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
  annotations:
    strimzi.io/next-node-ids: "[2000-2999]"
spec:
  # ...
```

### Scaling down a specific broker

The `strimzi.io/next-node-ids` annotation is used when new nodes are added.

> Its counter-part is the `strimzi.io/remove-node-ids` annotation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Its counterpart is the `strimzi.io/remove-node-ids` annotation.
```

It is used to define which node IDs (and which Kafka nodes) should be removed first when scaling down.
It uses the same format as the `strimzi.io/next-node-ids` annotation.
When the `strimzi.io/remove-node-ids` annotation is not set, Strimzi will always remove the node with the highest used node ID first.
So if you are fine with this, you do not need to use it.

> But when you want to remove a specific Kafka node from the cluster as discussed on the beginning, this is the way to do it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But when you want to remove a specific Kafka node from the cluster as discussed in the beginning, this is the way to do it.
```

For example, imagine we have a Kafka cluster with one node pool which has three Kafka nodes with IDs 100, 101, and 102:

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  name: pool-a
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
  annotations:
    strimzi.io/next-node-ids: "[100-199]"
spec:
  replicas: 3
  # ...
status:
  # ...
  nodeIds:
    - 100
    - 101
    - 102
```

And you want to remove the node with ID 101.
How do you do it?

1. First you have to annotate the node pool with the `strimzi.io/remove-node-ids` annotation and set it to the ID `101`:
   ```
   kubectl annotate kafkanodepool pool-a strimzi.io/remove-node-ids="[101]"
   ```
2. And then you scale-down the node pool to 2 replicas:
   ```
   kubectl scale kafkanodepool pool-a --replicas=2
   ```
   Strimzi will scale down the Kafka cluster and remove the node with ID 102.
3. Once the scale-down is finished, the `strimzi.io/remove-node-ids` annotation would not be needed anymore and will be ignored by the operator.
   So you can remove it:
   ```
   kubectl annotate kafkanodepool pool-a strimzi.io/remove-node-ids-
   ```

> And as a result of this, your cluster will now have only two nodes with IDs 100and 102:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And as a result of this, your cluster will now have only two nodes with IDs 100 and 102:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  name: pool-a
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
  annotations:
    strimzi.io/next-node-ids: "[100-199]"
spec:
  replicas: 2
  # ...
status:
  # ...
  nodeIds:
    - 100
    - 102
```

### Conclusion

> This blog post show how the Kafka Node Pools give you a full control over the Kafka node IDs that will be used.
> You do not have to use it if you don't want to.
> But at least you have the option now.
> In the next blog post, we will continue to look at some other situations where the Kafka Node Pools bring some improvements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are looking to have more control over managing Kafka node IDs, this post has shown how node pools can really help.
In the next post in this series, we'll continue exploring the benefits of using node pools in other situations. 
```
